README.md, before:

# 16-180 Concepts of Robotics

Welcome to Concepts of Robotics.  We will be working with the Mujoco simulator---a popular simulator used in Robotics and AI research. This repository includes the initial software setup you'll need for this class. We will be using a Git-based workflow. You will clone a main "Course Shell" folder, and then clone individual assignments into that folder as the semester progresses.

**Supported OS:** Windows 10/11, macOS (Intel/Apple Silicon), Ubuntu Linux.


## Step 1: Install Visual Studio Code (VS Code)

1. Download and install from code.visualstudio.com.
2. Open VS Code.
3. **macOS Users:** If asked "Allow Electron to find devices?", click **Allow.**
4. Install the Python extension (by Microsoft) via the Extensions tab on the left. (It may already be installed)

## Step 2: Install Git

You need Git to download course materials and submit assignments.

* **Windows:** Download "Git for Windows" from git-scm.com.
    * During install, accept all default options.
* **macOS:** Open a terminal and type `git --version`. If not installed, it will prompt you to install the Apple Command Line Tools. Accept.
* **Linux:** `sudo apt update && sudo apt install git`

## Step 3: Install Python

We recommend **Python 3.11**.

* **Windows:** python.org/downloads. **CRITICAL:** Check **"Add Python to PATH"** before clicking Install.
* **macOS:** Download the universal installer from [python.org], or use, if you have Homebrew, use `brew install python@3.11.`

## Step 4: Clone the This Repo

This will create your main folder for the semester. Using Git from VSCode.

1. Open VS Code.
2. Click "Clone Git Repositry..."
3. Where it asks "Provide repositry URL or pick a repository source." Copy and paste this URL:
```
https://github.com/cmu-16-180/16-180_Concepts_of_Robotics.git
```
4. It will pop open a directory selector. Navigate to where you want the class folder (e.g., Documents) and click "Select as Repository Destination".
5. Wait for the download to finish. A popup will appear at the bottom right asking "Would you like to open the cloned repository?"
    * **Click "Open".**
6. If it asks "Do you trust the authors of the files in this folder?"
    * Leave the checkbox next **unchecked** to "Trust the authors of all files in this parent folder ..." (You can check the box if you want, but it's not necessary for this class.
    * **Click the button "Yes, I trust the authors"**
7. If it asks, "The extension 'GitHub Copilot Chat' wants to sign in using GitHub'." You can cancel or allow to your preference (if you don't know, choose "Cancel")

Your file explorer on the left should now look like this:
```
16-180_Concepts_of_Robotics/
├── .gitignore
├── LICENSE
├── README.md (this file)
├── requirements.txt
├── scripts/
│   ├── check_setup.py
│   └── setup_menagerie.py
└── ...
```

## Step 5: Python Virtual Environment

We will create one virtual environment for the entire semester. A virtual environment includes all the software (e.g. the Mujoco Simulator) you will need for the class.

1. In the VS Code Terminal (ensure you are inside 16180_Concepts), run:
    * **Windows:** `python -m venv venv`
    * **Mac/Linux:** `python3 -m venv venv`
2. Activate it:
    * If VS Code asks "We noticed a new environment...," click **Yes.**
    * Check your terminal prompt. It should start with `(venv)`.
    * *If not active:*
        * **Windows:** `.\venv\Scripts\activate`
        * **Mac/Linux:** `source venv/bin/activate`
3. Install Dependencies:
```
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Step 6: Verify Installation

Run the verification script included in the shell.
* **Windows/Linux:** `python scripts/check_setup.py`
* **macOS:** `mjpython scripts/check_setup.py`

*Success Criteria:* A simulation window appears with a red box falling on a floor.

## Step 7: Install the Robot Zoo (Menagerie)

We will use Git to download the library of robot models.

Run the following command in your terminal (ensure you are still in the 16180_Concepts folder):

```
git clone https://github.com/google-deepmind/mujoco_menagerie.git menagerie
```

This will clone the MuJoCo Menagerie into a menagerie folder within your course directory.

Commit message:

Updated the Zoo keeper demo, instructions, and reduced download size using a script with Git sparse commands

README.md, after:

# 16-180 Concepts of Robotics

Welcome to Concepts of Robotics.  We will be working with the Mujoco simulator---a popular simulator used in Robotics and AI research. This repository includes the initial software setup you'll need for this class. We will be using a Git-based workflow. You will clone a main "Course Shell" folder, and then clone individual assignments into that folder as the semester progresses.

**Supported OS:** Windows 10/11, macOS (Intel/Apple Silicon), Ubuntu Linux.


## Step 1: Install Visual Studio Code (VS Code)

1. Download and install from code.visualstudio.com.
2. Open VS Code.
3. **macOS Users:** If asked "Allow Electron to find devices?", click **Allow.**
4. Install the Python extension (by Microsoft) via the Extensions tab on the left. (It may already be installed)

## Step 2: Install Git

You need Git to download course materials and submit assignments.

* **Windows:** Download "Git for Windows" from git-scm.com.
    * During install, accept all default options.
* **macOS:** Open a terminal and type `git --version`. If not installed, it will prompt you to install the Apple Command Line Tools. Accept.
* **Linux:** `sudo apt update && sudo apt install git`

## Step 3: Install Python

We recommend **Python 3.11**.

* **Windows:** python.org/downloads. **CRITICAL:** Check **"Add Python to PATH"** before clicking Install.
* **macOS:** Download the universal installer from [python.org], or use, if you have Homebrew, use `brew install python@3.11.`

## Step 4: Clone the This Repo

This will create your main folder for the semester. Using Git from VSCode.

1. Open VS Code.
2. Click "Clone Git Repositry..."
3. Where it asks "Provide repositry URL or pick a repository source." Copy and paste this URL:
```
https://github.com/cmu-16-180/16-180_Concepts_of_Robotics.git
```
4. It will pop open a directory selector. Navigate to where you want the class folder (e.g., Documents) and click "Select as Repository Destination". This will create a folder called `16-180_Concepts_of_Robotics` under the directory you select (e.g., `Documents/16-180_Concepts_of_Robotics`).
5. Wait for the download to finish. A popup will appear at the bottom right asking "Would you like to open the cloned repository?"
    * **Click "Open".**
6. If it asks "Do you trust the authors of the files in this folder?"
    * Leave the checkbox next **unchecked** to "Trust the authors of all files in this parent folder ..." (You can check the box if you want, but it's not necessary for this class.
    * **Click the button "Yes, I trust the authors"**
7. If it asks, "The extension 'GitHub Copilot Chat' wants to sign in using GitHub'." You can cancel or allow to your preference (if you don't know, choose "Cancel")

Your file explorer on the left should now look like this:
```
16-180_Concepts_of_Robotics/
├── .gitignore
├── LICENSE
├── README.md (this file)
├── requirements.txt
├── scripts/
│   ├── check_setup.py
│   └── setup_menagerie.py
└── ...
```

## Step 5: Python Virtual Environment

We will create one virtual environment for the entire semester. A virtual environment includes all the software (e.g. the Mujoco Simulator) you will need for the class.

1. In the VS Code Terminal (ensure you are inside 16180_Concepts), run:
    * **Windows:** `python -m venv venv`
    * **Mac/Linux:** `python3 -m venv venv`
2. Activate it:
    * If VS Code asks "We noticed a new environment...," click **Yes.**
    * Check your terminal prompt. It should start with `(venv)`.
    * *If not active:*
        * **Windows:** `.\venv\Scripts\activate`
        * **Mac/Linux:** `source venv/bin/activate`
3. Install Dependencies:
```
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Step 6: Verify Installation

Run the verification script included in the shell.
* **Windows/Linux:** `python scripts/check_setup.py`
* **macOS:** `mjpython scripts/check_setup.py`

*Success Criteria:* A simulation window appears with a red box falling on a floor.

## Step 7: Install the Robot Zoo (Menagerie)

We need the "Unitree Go1" robot model for our demos. The full Menagerie library is over 2GB, so we have provided a script that downloads only the robots we need (saving a LOT of space).

Run the following command in your terminal (ensure you are still in the `16-180_Concepts_of_Robotics` folder):
```
python scripts/setup_menagerie.py
```


## Step 8: Run the Unitree Go1 Demo

Now that the Menagerie is installed, run the `zoo_keeper.py` script included in the course shell to see a high-fidelity quadruped simulation.

* **Windows/Linux:** `python zoo_keeper.py`
* **macOS:** `mjpython zoo_keeper.py`

**Interaction Guide:**

1.  **Visuals:** You should see a robot dog marching in place.
2.  **Interaction:**
    *   **Double-click** the robot's silver torso to select it (it will highlight).
    *   **Apply Force:**
        *   **Windows/Linux:** Hold **CTRL + Right Click** and drag.
        *   **macOS:** Hold **Command (⌘) + Left Click** and drag (or Control + Two-finger click).
    *   You can shove the robot to test its stability!

### Next Steps

You are now fully set up for the semester! Please wait for the announcement regarding **Assignment 1**, which will include instructions on how to download the assignment code into this folder.
